book/src/bridge/extern_rustqt.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# `extern "RustQt"`

- [`QObject`s](#qobjects)
- [Properties](#properties)
- [Methods](#methods)
- [Signals](#signals)

```rust,ignore,noplayground
#[cxx_qt::bridge]
mod ffi {
    extern "RustQt" {

    }
}
```

The `extern "RustQt"` section of a CXX bridge declares Rust types and signatures to be made available to Qt and C++.

The CXX code generator uses your `extern "Rust"` section(s) to produce a C++ header file containing the corresponding C++ declarations. The generated header has the same file name as the input rust file but with `.cxxqt.h` file extension.

A bridge module may contain zero or more `extern "RustQt"` blocks.

This complements the [`extern "Rust"` CXX section](https://cxx.rs/extern-rust.html)
but allows for declaring Qt specific features on C++ types.

## `QObject`s

Types specified with a `#[qobject]` attribute are generated in C++ as a [`QObject`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qobject.html).

The left side of the type specifies the C++ generated type and name, when referring to the C++ context this should be used. The right side of the type specifies which Rust type provides the inner implementation of the type (for example fields).

```rust,ignore,noplayground
#[cxx_qt::bridge]
mod ffi {
    extern "RustQt" {
        #[qobject]
        type MyObject = super::MyObjectRust;
    }
}

#[derive(Default)]
struct MyObjectRust;
```

### QML Attributes

`QObject`s can be registered as a QML type directly at build time by using the [`#[qml_element]`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_ELEMENT) attribute.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_minimal/rust/src/cxxqt_object.rs:book_rustobj_struct_signature}}
```

Additionally, you can configure the QML registration with these attributes:
<!--
TODO: we need to add https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_ANONYMOUS
TODO: we need to add https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_INTERFACE
-->

- [`qml_element`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_NAMED_ELEMENT): Declare type as a qml element. An alternative type name for QML can be used like `qml_element = "MyName"`
- [`qml_uncreatable`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_UNCREATABLE): Mark the type as uncreatable from QML. It may still be returned by C++/Rust code.
- [`qml_singleton`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_SINGLETON): An instance of the `QObject` will be instantiated as a singleton in QML.

> The Rust file must be included within a [QML module in the `build.rs` file](../concepts/build_systems.md#qml-modules)

### `base` attribute

Use the `base` attribute to specify a C++ class that the C++ `QObject` will inherit from.
The base class must inherit from `QObject` (directly or indirectly). If you do not specify a base attribute, it will inherit directly from `QObject`.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/custom_base_class.rs:book_qobject_base}}
```

Use the CXX `include!` macro to include the appropriate C++ header for the base class:

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/custom_base_class.rs:book_base_include}}
```

For more information on inheritance and how to override methods see the [Inheritance & Overriding](../concepts/inheritance.md) page.

[Full Example](https://github.com/KDAB/cxx-qt/blob/main/examples/qml_features/rust/src/custom_base_class.rs)

### Traits

The [`Default` trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/default/trait.Default.html) needs to be implemented for the `#[qobject]` marked struct either by hand or by using the derive macro `#[derive(Default)]`. Or the [`cxx_qt::Constructor`](https://docs.rs/cxx-qt/latest/cxx_qt/trait.Constructor.html) trait needs to be implemented for the type.

For further documentation see the [traits page](./traits.md).

## Properties

The `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, ...)]` attribute can be specified on a [`#[qobject]` marked type](#qobjects) to expose a [`Q_PROPERTY`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/properties.html) on the generated `QObject`.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_minimal/rust/src/cxxqt_object.rs:book_rustobj_struct_signature}}
```

The type and name of the

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_minimal/rust/src/cxxqt_object.rs:book_rustobj_struct}}
```

For every `#[qproperty]`, CXX-Qt will generate setters and getters, as well as a "changed" signal.

On the C++ side:

- setter: `set<Property>`
- getter: `get<Property>`
- changed: `<Property>Changed`

On the Rust side:

- setter: `set_<Property>`
- getter: `<Property>`
- changed: `<Property>_changed`

The generated Rust methods for [signals](#signals):

- connect: `connect_<Property>_changed`
- on: `on_<Property>_changed`

Where `<Property>` is the name of the property.

These setters and getters assure that the changed signal is emitted every time the property is edited.

It is also possible to specify custom getters, setters and notify signals, using flags passed like so:
`#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, READ = myGetter, WRITE = mySetter, NOTIFY = myOnChanged)]`
> Note: the key for the flags use all capitals like in the Qt version of qproperty

It is also possible to use any combination of custom functions or omit them entirely, but if flags are specified, read must be included as all properties need to be able to be read.

Using the read flag will cause CXX-Qt to generate a getter function with an automatic name based off the property. e.g. `#[qproperty(i32, num, READ)]` will have a getter function generated called get_num in Rust, and getNum in C++.

If a custom function is specified, an implementation both in qobject::MyObject and and export in the bridge is expected.

### Examples

- `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, READ)]` A read only property
- `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, READ = myGetter, WRITE, NOTIFY)]` custom getter provided, but will generate setter and on-changed
- `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME)]` is shorthand for `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, READ, WRITE, NOTIFY)]`
- `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, WRITE)]` is an error as read was not explicitly passed

### Available Flags

- `READ` or `READ = my_getter`
  - Specifies that the property should be readable (*always required if flags are passed*), with optional user defined getter
- `WRITE` or `WRITE = my_setter`
  - Specifies that the property should be writeable, with optional user defined setter
- `NOTIFY` or `NOTIFY = my_on_changed`
  - Specifies that the property should emit a notify signal on change, with optional user defined signal name
- `CONSTANT`
  - Specifies that the property should be constant (implication is that the getter returns the same value every time for that particular instance)
  - __`CONSTANT` is not available for properties which use `WRITE` or `NOTIFY` and will not compile__
- `REQUIRED`
  - Specifies that the property must be set by a user of the class, useful in QML as the class cannot be instantiated unless the property has been set
- `FINAL`
  - Specifies that the property will not be overriden by a derived class
- `RESET = my_reset`
  - Specifies a function to reset the property to a default value, user function __must__ be provided or it will not compile

## Methods

Any signature with a `self` parameter is interpreted as a Rust method and exposed to C++ method for the given type.
The type much be either a shared reference `self: &T` or a pinned mutable reference `self: Pin<&mut T>`, where `T` is the [QObject](#qobjects) type.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/invokables.rs:book_cpp_method_signature}}
```

Implementations of the method are then written as normal on the C++ type outside the bridge.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/invokables.rs:book_cpp_method_impl}}
```

> Note how this uses `impl qobject::T` rather than `impl T` where `qobject` is the bridge module name.

### Invokables

The `#[qinvokable]` attribute can be specified on signatures to expose them as a [`Q_INVOKABLE`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qobject.html#Q_INVOKABLE) in C++.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/invokables.rs:book_invokable_signature}}
```

Implementations then have no difference to non invokable methods.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/invokables.rs:book_invokable_impl}}
```

### Inheritance

Methods or signals that already exist on the base class of an object can be accessed via the `#[inherit]` attribute.

For documentation see the [inheritance](../concepts/inheritance.md) page.

### Specifiers

Generated methods can have C++ specifiers necessary to implement inheritance.

| C++ keyword | CXX-Qt attribute              |
|-------------|-------------------------------|
| `override`  | `#[cxx_override]` |
| `virtual`   | `#[cxx_virtual]`  |
| `final`     | `#[cxx_final]`    |

These are specified as an attribute on the method signature.

```rust,ignore
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/custom_base_class.rs:book_inherit_data_signature}}
```

## Signals

The `qsignal` attribute is used in an `extern "RustQt"` block to define [signals](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/signalsandslots.html) for a `QObject`.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs:book_signals_block}}
```

For every function signature in the `extern` block, CXX-Qt will generate a signal on the corresponding `QObject`.
If the function has parameters, they will become the parameters for the corresponding signal.

If a signal is defined on the base class of the `QObject` then `#[inherit]` can be used to indicate to CXX-Qt that the `Q_SIGNAL` does not need to be created in C++.

A full example can be found in the [qml features](https://github.com/KDAB/cxx-qt/blob/main/examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs).

> Note that `#[cxx_name = "..."]` can also be used on a signal to declare a different name in C++ to Rust

> Note using `pub(self)` as the visibility of the signal
> allows for declaring private signals

### Connecting to a signal

For every signal defined in the enum, two methods are generated.

  1. `on_<signal_name>`
  2. `connect_<signal_name>`

The `on_<signal_name>` method takes a handler function as the parameter, which will be called when the signal is emitted.
That handler function's first argument is the `QObject` and the remaining arguments are the signal parameters.

The `connect_<signal_name>` function additionally takes the [Qt connection type](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qt.html#ConnectionType-enum) as a parameter.

Note that by using the `#[inherit]` macro on a signal, connections can be made to property changes
using the signal name `<property>Changed` with no parameters.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs:book_signals_connect}}
```

Each connection returns a `QMetaObjectConnectionGuard` which is used to manage the [`QMetaObject::Connection`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qmetaobject-connection.html) connection.

Note that the `QMetaObjectConnection` returned by CXX-Qt behaves a bit different from the Qt C++ implementation.

When the `QMetaObjectConnectionGuard` is dropped, it automatically disconnects the connection, similar to how a C++ `std::unique_ptr` or Rusts `Box` behaves.
If you don't want to store the `QMetaObjectConnectionGuard`, call `release`, which will drop the object without disconnecting and return the internal `QMetaObjecConnection`.

> Note that the `QMetaObjectConnection` has a `disconnect` which can be called manually later

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs:book_signals_disconnect}}
```

### Emitting a signal

Call the function signature defined in the `extern "RustQt"` block to emit the signal.

Note that these are defined on the generated `QObject` [`qobject::T`](../concepts/generated_qobject.md), so can be called from any mutable `#[qinvokable]`.

The function will immediately emit the signal.
Depending on the connection type, the connected slots will be called either immediately or from the event loop (See [the different connection types](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qt.html#ConnectionType-enum)).
To queue the call until the next cycle of the Qt event loop, you can use the [`CxxQtThread`](https://docs.rs/cxx-qt/latest/cxx_qt/struct.CxxQtThread.html).

### Signal Inheritance

If a signal is defined on the base class of the `QObject` then the `#[inherit]` attribute can be used to indicate to CXX-Qt that the `Q_SIGNAL` does not need to be created in C++.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/custom_base_class.rs:book_qsignals_inherit}}
```

Commit message:

Feature naming on properties (#1072)
* Switch ParsedQProperty to use Name instead of Ident, and allow cxx_name and rust_name in flags
- Add closure to group behaviour of flags requiring a value passed

* Add parsing checks for name flags
- using cxx_name or rust_name is allowed without READ flag
- Maintains error for using property flags e.g. WRITE without including READ
- cxx_name and rust_name must have strings as values, whereas other flags still need idents

* Add naming to a property in test_inputs
- Also refactor value assignment in parse_meta_name_value
- Refactor cxx_name so that having no cxx_name requires no rust_name to do camelcase conversion

* Add new Name method to combine common logic
- Applies options with the correct renaming logic, and this is used in property renaming
- Also switch from format_ident to a propagating syn::parse_string instead

* Update changelog and book

* Add to example and refactor auto_camel in name function

book/src/bridge/extern_rustqt.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2023 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# `extern "RustQt"`

- [`QObject`s](#qobjects)
- [Properties](#properties)
- [Methods](#methods)
- [Signals](#signals)

```rust,ignore,noplayground
#[cxx_qt::bridge]
mod ffi {
    extern "RustQt" {

    }
}
```

The `extern "RustQt"` section of a CXX bridge declares Rust types and signatures to be made available to Qt and C++.

The CXX code generator uses your `extern "Rust"` section(s) to produce a C++ header file containing the corresponding C++ declarations. The generated header has the same file name as the input rust file but with `.cxxqt.h` file extension.

A bridge module may contain zero or more `extern "RustQt"` blocks.

This complements the [`extern "Rust"` CXX section](https://cxx.rs/extern-rust.html)
but allows for declaring Qt specific features on C++ types.

## `QObject`s

Types specified with a `#[qobject]` attribute are generated in C++ as a [`QObject`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qobject.html).

The left side of the type specifies the C++ generated type and name, when referring to the C++ context this should be used. The right side of the type specifies which Rust type provides the inner implementation of the type (for example fields).

```rust,ignore,noplayground
#[cxx_qt::bridge]
mod ffi {
    extern "RustQt" {
        #[qobject]
        type MyObject = super::MyObjectRust;
    }
}

#[derive(Default)]
struct MyObjectRust;
```

### QML Attributes

`QObject`s can be registered as a QML type directly at build time by using the [`#[qml_element]`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_ELEMENT) attribute.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_minimal/rust/src/cxxqt_object.rs:book_rustobj_struct_signature}}
```

Additionally, you can configure the QML registration with these attributes:
<!--
TODO: we need to add https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_ANONYMOUS
TODO: we need to add https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_INTERFACE
-->

- [`qml_element`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_NAMED_ELEMENT): Declare type as a qml element. An alternative type name for QML can be used like `qml_element = "MyName"`
- [`qml_uncreatable`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_UNCREATABLE): Mark the type as uncreatable from QML. It may still be returned by C++/Rust code.
- [`qml_singleton`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qqmlengine.html#QML_SINGLETON): An instance of the `QObject` will be instantiated as a singleton in QML.

> The Rust file must be included within a [QML module in the `build.rs` file](../concepts/build_systems.md#qml-modules)

### `base` attribute

Use the `base` attribute to specify a C++ class that the C++ `QObject` will inherit from.
The base class must inherit from `QObject` (directly or indirectly). If you do not specify a base attribute, it will inherit directly from `QObject`.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/custom_base_class.rs:book_qobject_base}}
```

Use the CXX `include!` macro to include the appropriate C++ header for the base class:

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/custom_base_class.rs:book_base_include}}
```

For more information on inheritance and how to override methods see the [Inheritance & Overriding](../concepts/inheritance.md) page.

[Full Example](https://github.com/KDAB/cxx-qt/blob/main/examples/qml_features/rust/src/custom_base_class.rs)

### Traits

The [`Default` trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/default/trait.Default.html) needs to be implemented for the `#[qobject]` marked struct either by hand or by using the derive macro `#[derive(Default)]`. Or the [`cxx_qt::Constructor`](https://docs.rs/cxx-qt/latest/cxx_qt/trait.Constructor.html) trait needs to be implemented for the type.

For further documentation see the [traits page](./traits.md).

## Properties

The `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, ...)]` attribute can be specified on a [`#[qobject]` marked type](#qobjects) to expose a [`Q_PROPERTY`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/properties.html) on the generated `QObject`.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_minimal/rust/src/cxxqt_object.rs:book_rustobj_struct_signature}}
```

The type and name of the

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_minimal/rust/src/cxxqt_object.rs:book_rustobj_struct}}
```

For every `#[qproperty]`, CXX-Qt will generate setters and getters, as well as a "changed" signal.

On the C++ side:

- setter: `set<Property>`
- getter: `get<Property>`
- changed: `<Property>Changed`

On the Rust side:

- setter: `set_<Property>`
- getter: `<Property>`
- changed: `<Property>_changed`

The generated Rust methods for [signals](#signals):

- connect: `connect_<Property>_changed`
- on: `on_<Property>_changed`

Where `<Property>` is the name of the property.

These setters and getters assure that the changed signal is emitted every time the property is edited.

It is also possible to specify custom getters, setters and notify signals, using flags passed like so:
`#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, READ = myGetter, WRITE = mySetter, NOTIFY = myOnChanged)]`
> Note: the key for the flags use all capitals like in the Qt version of qproperty

It is also possible to use any combination of custom functions or omit them entirely, but if flags are specified, read must be included as all properties need to be able to be read.

Using the read flag will cause CXX-Qt to generate a getter function with an automatic name based off the property. e.g. `#[qproperty(i32, num, READ)]` will have a getter function generated called get_num in Rust, and getNum in C++.

If a custom function is specified, an implementation both in qobject::MyObject and and export in the bridge is expected.

Additionally, usng cxx_name and rust_name is possible similarly to the attributes avilable on other items. e.g. `#[qproperty(i32, num, cxx_name = "numberProp")]`

### Examples

- `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, READ)]` A read only property
- `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, READ = myGetter, WRITE, NOTIFY)]` custom getter provided, but will generate setter and on-changed
- `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME)]` is shorthand for `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, READ, WRITE, NOTIFY)]`
- `#[qproperty(TYPE, NAME, WRITE)]` is an error as read was not explicitly passed

### Available Flags

- `READ` or `READ = my_getter`
  - Specifies that the property should be readable (*always required if flags are passed*), with optional user defined getter
- `WRITE` or `WRITE = my_setter`
  - Specifies that the property should be writeable, with optional user defined setter
- `NOTIFY` or `NOTIFY = my_on_changed`
  - Specifies that the property should emit a notify signal on change, with optional user defined signal name
- `CONSTANT`
  - Specifies that the property should be constant (implication is that the getter returns the same value every time for that particular instance)
  - __`CONSTANT` is not available for properties which use `WRITE` or `NOTIFY` and will not compile__
- `REQUIRED`
  - Specifies that the property must be set by a user of the class, useful in QML as the class cannot be instantiated unless the property has been set
- `FINAL`
  - Specifies that the property will not be overriden by a derived class
- `RESET = my_reset`
  - Specifies a function to reset the property to a default value, user function __must__ be provided or it will not compile
- `cxx_name = "myCxxName`
  - Specifies an alternative name to use on the C++ side, applying to the property name as well as autogenerated functions
- `rust_name = "my_rust_name"`
  - Specifies an alternative name to use on the rust side, applying to the property name as well as autogenerated functions

## Methods

Any signature with a `self` parameter is interpreted as a Rust method and exposed to C++ method for the given type.
The type much be either a shared reference `self: &T` or a pinned mutable reference `self: Pin<&mut T>`, where `T` is the [QObject](#qobjects) type.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/invokables.rs:book_cpp_method_signature}}
```

Implementations of the method are then written as normal on the C++ type outside the bridge.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/invokables.rs:book_cpp_method_impl}}
```

> Note how this uses `impl qobject::T` rather than `impl T` where `qobject` is the bridge module name.

### Invokables

The `#[qinvokable]` attribute can be specified on signatures to expose them as a [`Q_INVOKABLE`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qobject.html#Q_INVOKABLE) in C++.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/invokables.rs:book_invokable_signature}}
```

Implementations then have no difference to non invokable methods.

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/invokables.rs:book_invokable_impl}}
```

### Inheritance

Methods or signals that already exist on the base class of an object can be accessed via the `#[inherit]` attribute.

For documentation see the [inheritance](../concepts/inheritance.md) page.

### Specifiers

Generated methods can have C++ specifiers necessary to implement inheritance.

| C++ keyword | CXX-Qt attribute              |
|-------------|-------------------------------|
| `override`  | `#[cxx_override]` |
| `virtual`   | `#[cxx_virtual]`  |
| `final`     | `#[cxx_final]`    |

These are specified as an attribute on the method signature.

```rust,ignore
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/custom_base_class.rs:book_inherit_data_signature}}
```

## Signals

The `qsignal` attribute is used in an `extern "RustQt"` block to define [signals](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/signalsandslots.html) for a `QObject`.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs:book_signals_block}}
```

For every function signature in the `extern` block, CXX-Qt will generate a signal on the corresponding `QObject`.
If the function has parameters, they will become the parameters for the corresponding signal.

If a signal is defined on the base class of the `QObject` then `#[inherit]` can be used to indicate to CXX-Qt that the `Q_SIGNAL` does not need to be created in C++.

A full example can be found in the [qml features](https://github.com/KDAB/cxx-qt/blob/main/examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs).

> Note that `#[cxx_name = "..."]` can also be used on a signal to declare a different name in C++ to Rust

> Note using `pub(self)` as the visibility of the signal
> allows for declaring private signals

### Connecting to a signal

For every signal defined in the enum, two methods are generated.

  1. `on_<signal_name>`
  2. `connect_<signal_name>`

The `on_<signal_name>` method takes a handler function as the parameter, which will be called when the signal is emitted.
That handler function's first argument is the `QObject` and the remaining arguments are the signal parameters.

The `connect_<signal_name>` function additionally takes the [Qt connection type](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qt.html#ConnectionType-enum) as a parameter.

Note that by using the `#[inherit]` macro on a signal, connections can be made to property changes
using the signal name `<property>Changed` with no parameters.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs:book_signals_connect}}
```

Each connection returns a `QMetaObjectConnectionGuard` which is used to manage the [`QMetaObject::Connection`](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qmetaobject-connection.html) connection.

Note that the `QMetaObjectConnection` returned by CXX-Qt behaves a bit different from the Qt C++ implementation.

When the `QMetaObjectConnectionGuard` is dropped, it automatically disconnects the connection, similar to how a C++ `std::unique_ptr` or Rusts `Box` behaves.
If you don't want to store the `QMetaObjectConnectionGuard`, call `release`, which will drop the object without disconnecting and return the internal `QMetaObjecConnection`.

> Note that the `QMetaObjectConnection` has a `disconnect` which can be called manually later

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs:book_signals_disconnect}}
```

### Emitting a signal

Call the function signature defined in the `extern "RustQt"` block to emit the signal.

Note that these are defined on the generated `QObject` [`qobject::T`](../concepts/generated_qobject.md), so can be called from any mutable `#[qinvokable]`.

The function will immediately emit the signal.
Depending on the connection type, the connected slots will be called either immediately or from the event loop (See [the different connection types](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qt.html#ConnectionType-enum)).
To queue the call until the next cycle of the Qt event loop, you can use the [`CxxQtThread`](https://docs.rs/cxx-qt/latest/cxx_qt/struct.CxxQtThread.html).

### Signal Inheritance

If a signal is defined on the base class of the `QObject` then the `#[inherit]` attribute can be used to indicate to CXX-Qt that the `Q_SIGNAL` does not need to be created in C++.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/custom_base_class.rs:book_qsignals_inherit}}
```
