book/src/getting-started/1-qobjects-in-rust.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Leon Matthes <leon.matthes@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# `QObject`s in Rust

> The right tool for the right job.

> If you only have a hammer, every problem looks like a nail.

> Don't bring a knife to a gun fight.

There are many bits of advice like that.
With CXX-Qt, we aim to make it possible to use the right tool for each of the many jobs necessary to build a modern GUI application.

So what is in our toolbox for a typical Qt application?

- QML - A declarative, flexible, dynamically-typed, interpreted language that is purpose built to define reactive and beautiful GUI layouts and widgets with quick iteration speed.
- C++ - The traditional back-end of Qt - A fast, low-level language with a strong type system. C++ offers a rich ecosystem, many Qt-specific libraries and bare-metal performance. The cost when using C++ is that it is slow to develop, very error-prone and can easily lead to memory-issues, which can instantly crash your application and cause security issues.

Notably absent then is a back-end language that allows us to get rid of the issues C++ has and provides us with a safe way to write high-performance back-end code.
This of course is where Rust comes in.
Rust offers a similar level of control and performance, but without many of the downsides of C++.
Whilst Rusts ecosystem is still maturing, it is typically faster to develop than C++, with easy dependency management, and most importantly, safe memory access.
Therefore, it is an ideal candidate to replace C++ for writing the back-end business-logic code that feeds the GUI with data.

However, C++ as well as QML still have their place in Qt applications.
For that reason Rust, C++, and QML should all be able to be used to complement each other.
CXX-Qt aims to make it easy to integrate all three languages with each other, through the use of Qt's [meta-object system](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/metaobjects.html) and [CXX](https://cxx.rs).

As CXX-Qt is largely an expansion on top of CXX, you should make yourself familiar with CXX first.
You can read their excellent documentation here:
> <https://cxx.rs/>

CXX already provides idiomatic interaction between C++ and Rust, from Rust, as well as from C++.
CXX-Qt builds on this foundation, to allow you to define Qt-specific concepts in Rust.

These concepts include:

- Custom `QObject` classes
  - Properties
  - Invokables/Slots
  - Signals
  - Inheritance and overriding
- Enums (`QEnum`)
- Namespaces (`QNamespace`)

As with CXX, to use these features you mark a Rust module with an attribute macro ([`#[cxx_qt::bridge]`](../bridge/index.md)).
Inside this bridge, you then describe the bidirectional interface between your C++/Qt and Rust code.

CXX-Qt will then expand this Rust bridge into two separate parts:

- C++ files that define `QObject`s, enums etc. and expose them to [Qt's meta-object-system](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/metaobjects.html).
- The Rust code which provides the Rust implementation of the described structures, as well as interfaces to any C++/Qt constructs you declared.

<div style="background-color: white; padding: 1rem; text-align: center;">

![Overview of CXX-Qt module generation](../images/overview_abstract.svg)

</div>

## Rust structs as `QObject`s

Similar to CXX, CXX-Qt allows you to expose Rust `struct`s as a new type to C++.
However, CXX-Qt expands this feature to allow you to create a new `QObject` subclass that is backed by a Rust `struct`.
In comparison to a normal opaque CXX class, the mapping between the `QObject` subclass and the Rust `struct` is **not 1:1**!

The `QObject` subclass is its own type in Rust, as well as in C++.
When such a `QObject` is instantiated, it will always also construct an instance of the Rust `struct`.
The `QObject` can then refer to the underlying Rust `struct` for property access.
Any behavior of this `QObject` subclass will also be defined in Rust, e.g. using the [`#[qinvokable]`](../bridge/extern_rustqt.html#invokables) attribute.
The Rust implementation also has access to the underlying Rust `struct` to modify any Rust data.
In comparison to most CXX types, the outer `QObject` class and the inner Rust `struct` will remain two distinct types!

But enough theory for now, let's jump in and write [our first CXX-Qt module](./2-our-first-cxx-qt-module.md).

Commit message:

Add book entry for instantiating in Rust

book/src/getting-started/1-qobjects-in-rust.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Leon Matthes <leon.matthes@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# `QObject`s in Rust

> The right tool for the right job.

> If you only have a hammer, every problem looks like a nail.

> Don't bring a knife to a gun fight.

There are many bits of advice like that.
With CXX-Qt, we aim to make it possible to use the right tool for each of the many jobs necessary to build a modern GUI application.

So what is in our toolbox for a typical Qt application?

- QML - A declarative, flexible, dynamically-typed, interpreted language that is purpose built to define reactive and beautiful GUI layouts and widgets with quick iteration speed.
- C++ - The traditional back-end of Qt - A fast, low-level language with a strong type system. C++ offers a rich ecosystem, many Qt-specific libraries and bare-metal performance. The cost when using C++ is that it is slow to develop, very error-prone and can easily lead to memory-issues, which can instantly crash your application and cause security issues.

Notably absent then is a back-end language that allows us to get rid of the issues C++ has and provides us with a safe way to write high-performance back-end code.
This of course is where Rust comes in.
Rust offers a similar level of control and performance, but without many of the downsides of C++.
Whilst Rusts ecosystem is still maturing, it is typically faster to develop than C++, with easy dependency management, and most importantly, safe memory access.
Therefore, it is an ideal candidate to replace C++ for writing the back-end business-logic code that feeds the GUI with data.

However, C++ as well as QML still have their place in Qt applications.
For that reason Rust, C++, and QML should all be able to be used to complement each other.
CXX-Qt aims to make it easy to integrate all three languages with each other, through the use of Qt's [meta-object system](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/metaobjects.html) and [CXX](https://cxx.rs).

As CXX-Qt is largely an expansion on top of CXX, you should make yourself familiar with CXX first.
You can read their excellent documentation here:
> <https://cxx.rs/>

CXX already provides idiomatic interaction between C++ and Rust, from Rust, as well as from C++.
CXX-Qt builds on this foundation, to allow you to define Qt-specific concepts in Rust.

These concepts include:

- Custom `QObject` classes
  - Properties
  - Invokables/Slots
  - Signals
  - Inheritance and overriding
- Enums (`QEnum`)
- Namespaces (`QNamespace`)

As with CXX, to use these features you mark a Rust module with an attribute macro ([`#[cxx_qt::bridge]`](../bridge/index.md)).
Inside this bridge, you then describe the bidirectional interface between your C++/Qt and Rust code.

CXX-Qt will then expand this Rust bridge into two separate parts:

- C++ files that define `QObject`s, enums etc. and expose them to [Qt's meta-object-system](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/metaobjects.html).
- The Rust code which provides the Rust implementation of the described structures, as well as interfaces to any C++/Qt constructs you declared.

<div style="background-color: white; padding: 1rem; text-align: center;">

![Overview of CXX-Qt module generation](../images/overview_abstract.svg)

</div>

## Rust structs as `QObject`s

Similar to CXX, CXX-Qt allows you to expose Rust `struct`s as a new type to C++.
However, CXX-Qt expands this feature to allow you to create a new `QObject` subclass that is backed by a Rust `struct`.
In comparison to a normal opaque CXX class, the mapping between the `QObject` subclass and the Rust `struct` is **not 1:1**!

The `QObject` subclass is its own type in Rust, as well as in C++.
When such a `QObject` is instantiated, it will always also construct an instance of the Rust `struct`.
The `QObject`s Rust struct can also be directly constructed via a `UniquePtr<YourObject>` in Rust, but this is a less common use case,
see [here](../concepts/instantiating_in_rust.md) for more information.
The `QObject` can then refer to the underlying Rust `struct` for property access.
Any behavior of this `QObject` subclass will also be defined in Rust, e.g. using the [`#[qinvokable]`](../bridge/extern_rustqt.html#invokables) attribute.
The Rust implementation also has access to the underlying Rust `struct` to modify any Rust data.
In comparison to most CXX types, the outer `QObject` class and the inner Rust `struct` will remain two distinct types!

But enough theory for now, let's jump in and write [our first CXX-Qt module](./2-our-first-cxx-qt-module.md).
