book/src/getting-started/6-wasm-builds.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2024 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Matt Aber <matt.aber@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# Building for WebAssembly

CXX-Qt and applications written with it can be compiled for WebAssembly, with a few limitations. Below you will find detailed instructions regarding how to build for the WASM target.

## Additional Requirements

You will need to have Qt for WebAssembly installed. The next section shows versions that have been tested.

Make sure you have the Emscripten target for `rustc` with `rustup target add wasm-unknown-emscripten`.

Additionally, if you haven't already, clone the `emsdk` git repo from [here](https://github.com/emscripten-core/emsdk).

## Using Correct Versions

The version of Emscripten used to build CXX-Qt and programs using it should match the one that was used to build Qt for WebAssembly. This is because Emscripten does not guarantee ABI compatibility between versions, so using different versions is not guaranteed to work fully or even at all.

Here are the associated Qt and Emscripten versions, and whether they are currently working with CXX-Qt for WebAssembly:

Qt|Emscripten|CXX-Qt Support: `wasm_32`|CXX-Qt Support: `wasm_singlethread`|CXX-Qt Support: `wasm_multithread`
-|-|-|-|-
6.2|2.0.14|✅ working|*️⃣ N/A|*️⃣ N/A
6.3|3.0.0|✅ working|*️⃣ N/A|*️⃣ N/A
6.4|3.1.14|✅ working|*️⃣ N/A|*️⃣ N/A
6.5|3.1.25|*️⃣ N/A|✅ working|❌ broken
6.6|3.1.37|*️⃣ N/A|✅ working|❌ broken

Info about other versions can be found in the [Qt documentation](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/wasm.html).

Make sure you have a version of Qt for WebAssembly that will work and clone the `emsdk` repository if you do not already have it.

## Setting Up `emsdk`

Once you know which Qt and Emscripten versions you will use, navigate to the root directory of the `emsdk` repo and run the following commands:

```bash
$ ./emsdk install <emscripten version>
$ ./emsdk activate <emscripten version>
$ source ./emsdk_env.sh
```

For example, if you are going to use Qt 6.4, the corresponding version of Emscripten is 3.1.14, so the first command will be:

```bash
$ ./emsdk install 3.1.14
```

On Windows, the third step, which sets up environment variables (`source` command above on Unix-like environments) is unnecessary because the required environment setup will already be done.

## Building CXX-Qt

When invoking CMake, the `CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE` variable needs to be set to the correct toolchain file; for example, if using Qt 6.4.2 on WebAssembly, the toolchain file is typically located at `/path/to/Qt/6.4.2/wasm_32/lib/cmake/Qt6/qt.toolchain.cmake`. This will set CMake up to use the correct Qt path, compiler, linker, and so forth.

Generally, this does not need to be done manually. Using the `qt-cmake` binary bundled with your selected version of Qt WASM will set the toolchain file for you. However, in Qt 6.3 and below, the bundled CMake is version 3.22, while CXX-Qt requires at least version 3.24. For these versions of Qt, a more up-to-date CMake binary needs to be used to configure, so `CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE` needs to be passed into the `cmake` command.

Navigate to the root directory of the CXX-Qt repo and run the following command to configure CXX-Qt for WebAssembly:

```bash
$ /path/to/qt-cmake -DBUILD_WASM=ON -B build .
```

If using a different CMake binary, instead do this:

```bash
$ <cmake binary> -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=/path/to/qt.toolchain.cmake -DBUILD_WASM=ON -B build .
```

Finally, run `cmake --build` on the configured build directory to compile and link the project and examples. This can be any CMake binary, here the OS package works just fine:

```bash
$ cmake --build build
```

Then you can run the `qml_minimal` example like so:

```bash
$ emrun ./build/examples/qml_minimal/example_qml_minimal.html
```

## Working Examples

Not all of the examples are currently supported for WASM builds.

Example|Working
-|-
`qml-minimal-no-cmake`|❌ broken
`demo_threading`|❌ broken
`qml_features`|✅ working
`qml_minimal`|✅ working

## Issues

- CXX-Qt will currently not build with `wasm_multithread` versions of Qt:

    ```console
    wasm-ld: error: --shared-memory is disallowed by qml_minimal-e6f36338b0e1fa5c.17g6vcid2nczsjj0.rcgu.o 
                because it was not compiled with 'atomics' or 'bulk-memory' features.
    ```

- The example `qml-minimal-no-cmake` will not build for WebAssembly with Cargo
- The example `demo_threading` will not build for WebAssembly

Commit message:

Book: cmake anchors exclude BUILD_WASM, explain qt_add_executable

book/src/getting-started/6-wasm-builds.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2024 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Matt Aber <matt.aber@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# Building for WebAssembly

CXX-Qt and applications written with it can be compiled for WebAssembly, with a few limitations. Below you will find detailed instructions regarding how to build for the WASM target.

## Additional Requirements

You will need to have Qt for WebAssembly installed. The next section shows versions that have been tested.

Make sure you have the Emscripten target for `rustc` with `rustup target add wasm-unknown-emscripten`.

Additionally, if you haven't already, clone the `emsdk` git repo from [here](https://github.com/emscripten-core/emsdk).

## Using Correct Versions

The version of Emscripten used to build CXX-Qt and programs using it should match the one that was used to build Qt for WebAssembly. This is because Emscripten does not guarantee ABI compatibility between versions, so using different versions is not guaranteed to work fully or even at all.

Here are the associated Qt and Emscripten versions, and whether they are currently working with CXX-Qt for WebAssembly:

Qt|Emscripten|CXX-Qt Support: `wasm_32`|CXX-Qt Support: `wasm_singlethread`|CXX-Qt Support: `wasm_multithread`
-|-|-|-|-
6.2|2.0.14|✅ working|*️⃣ N/A|*️⃣ N/A
6.3|3.0.0|✅ working|*️⃣ N/A|*️⃣ N/A
6.4|3.1.14|✅ working|*️⃣ N/A|*️⃣ N/A
6.5|3.1.25|*️⃣ N/A|✅ working|❌ broken
6.6|3.1.37|*️⃣ N/A|✅ working|❌ broken

Info about other versions can be found in the [Qt documentation](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/wasm.html).

Make sure you have a version of Qt for WebAssembly that will work and clone the `emsdk` repository if you do not already have it.

## Setting Up `emsdk`

Once you know which Qt and Emscripten versions you will use, navigate to the root directory of the `emsdk` repo and run the following commands:

```bash
$ ./emsdk install <emscripten version>
$ ./emsdk activate <emscripten version>
$ source ./emsdk_env.sh
```

For example, if you are going to use Qt 6.4, the corresponding version of Emscripten is 3.1.14, so the first command will be:

```bash
$ ./emsdk install 3.1.14
```

On Windows, the third step, which sets up environment variables (`source` command above on Unix-like environments) is unnecessary because the required environment setup will already be done.

## Building CXX-Qt

When invoking CMake, the `CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE` variable needs to be set to the correct toolchain file; for example, if using Qt 6.4.2 on WebAssembly, the toolchain file is typically located at `/path/to/Qt/6.4.2/wasm_32/lib/cmake/Qt6/qt.toolchain.cmake`. This will set CMake up to use the correct Qt path, compiler, linker, and so forth.

Generally, this does not need to be done manually. Using the `qt-cmake` binary bundled with your selected version of Qt WASM will set the toolchain file for you. However, in Qt 6.3 and below, the bundled CMake is version 3.22, while CXX-Qt requires at least version 3.24. For these versions of Qt, a more up-to-date CMake binary needs to be used to configure, so `CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE` needs to be passed into the `cmake` command.

Navigate to the root directory of the CXX-Qt repo and run the following command to configure CXX-Qt for WebAssembly:

```bash
$ /path/to/qt-cmake -DBUILD_WASM=ON -B build .
```

If using a different CMake binary, instead do this:

```bash
$ <cmake binary> -DCMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE=/path/to/qt.toolchain.cmake -DBUILD_WASM=ON -B build .
```

Finally, run `cmake --build` on the configured build directory to compile and link the project and examples. This can be any CMake binary, here the OS package works just fine:

```bash
$ cmake --build build
```

Then you can run the `qml_minimal` example like so:

```bash
$ emrun ./build/examples/qml_minimal/example_qml_minimal.html
```

## Working Examples

Not all of the examples are currently supported for WASM builds.

Example|Working
-|-
`qml-minimal-no-cmake`|❌ broken
`demo_threading`|❌ broken
`qml_features`|✅ working
`qml_minimal`|✅ working

## Compiling CXX-Qt Projects for WebAssembly

When compiling a CXX-Qt project for wasm, the Rust target must be set to `wasm32-unknown-emscripten`, and the project must be configured to use POSIX threads.

```cmake
set(Rust_CARGO_TARGET wasm32-unknown-emscripten)
set(THREADS_PREFER_PTHREAD_FLAG ON)
find_package(Threads REQUIRED)
```

Using CMake, `add_executable` will not output an HTML file when targeting wasm. In order to render an HTML file, one must use `qt_add_executable` in its place. Assuming a project has a CMake flag `BUILD_WASM` to toggle wasm and native builds, one could write the following:

```cmake
if(BUILD_WASM)
    qt_add_executable(${APP_NAME} ${SOURCE_FILES})
else()
    add_executable(${APP_NAME} ${SOURCE_FILES})
endif()
```

## Issues

- CXX-Qt will currently not build with `wasm_multithread` versions of Qt:

    ```console
    wasm-ld: error: --shared-memory is disallowed by qml_minimal-e6f36338b0e1fa5c.17g6vcid2nczsjj0.rcgu.o 
                because it was not compiled with 'atomics' or 'bulk-memory' features.
    ```

- The example `qml-minimal-no-cmake` will not build for WebAssembly with Cargo
- The example `demo_threading` will not build for WebAssembly
