book/src/qobject/cxxqtthread.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# CxxQtThread

`CxxQtThread<T>` is used for [threading](../concepts/threading.md) with QObject#s and allows you to queue events from a background thread to occur on the Qt event loop.

To access the `CxxQtThread<T>` use the `qt_thread(&self)` method on the [`CppObj`](./cpp_object.md) or on the C++ pointer of the QObject.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/threading.rs:book_qt_thread}}
```

The `CxxQtThread<T>` can then be moved into the Rust thread, a `queue(fn(ctx: Pin<&mut TQt>) -> bool` is used to queue a Rust function pointer onto the Qt event loop. The first argument in the function pointer is a pinned pointer to the C++ side of the QObject.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/threading.rs:book_qt_thread_queue}}
```

Commit message:

Book: Update qobject::T, Signals & CXXQtThread sections

book/src/qobject/cxxqtthread.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# CxxQtThread

`CxxQtThread<T>` is used for easy [threading](../concepts/threading.md) with QObjects.
The QObjects generated by CXX-Qt are neither [`Sync`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Sync.html) nor [`Send`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Send.html).
Therefore they may not be passed between threads.

`CxxQtThread<T>` is a handle to the Qt thread that the `qobject::T` lives on.
This handle is `Send` and can therefore be moved into other threads.
It allows you to queue events from a different thread to occur on the thread of the `qobject::T` by using the Qt Event Loop.

To access the `CxxQtThread<T>` use the `qt_thread(&self)` method on a [`qobject::T`](./cpp_object.md).

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/threading.rs:book_qt_thread}}
```

The `CxxQtThread<T>` can then be moved into any Rust thread.
The `queue` function can then be used to queue a lambda onto the Qt event loop:
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
fn queue(impl FnOnce(ctx: Pin<&mut TQt>)) -> bool
```
The first argument of the lambda is a pinned mutable reference to the `qobject::T`.
With this parameter, you can then update the QObject to reflect any state changes that have occured in the background thread.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/threading.rs:book_qt_thread_queue}}
```
[Full example](https://github.com/KDAB/cxx-qt/blob/main/examples/qml_features/rust/src/threading.rs)
