<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# `qobject::T` - The generated QObject

One of the key features of CXX-Qt is the ability to create your own QObjects from Rust.
This is what the [`#[cxx_qt::qobject]` macro](./qobject_struct.md) is for.
This page serves to document the details of what is generated and how to interact with the generated QObject from Rust.

The `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` macro generates a QObject for a given Rust struct.
Whilst this QObject is a C++ type, CXX-Qt will automatically wrap it as a [CXX Opaque Type](https://cxx.rs/extern-c++.html#opaque-c-types).
These generated QObjects are accessible to Rust in a generated module with the name `qobject`. Each struct `T`'s generated QObject is accessible as `qobject::T`.

## Anatomy

Any QObject generated by CXX-Qt is just a C++ QObject subclass that owns an instance of the Rust struct.
The instance of the Rust struct is constructed using its [`Default`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/default/trait.Default.html) implementation in the C++ constructor.
Therefore implementing `Default` on the Rust struct is currently mandatory.

The C++ object will defer any property state to the Rust struct, and is therefore only a thin wrapper.
The data for `Q_PROPERTY`s is stored in the Rust struct. The property getters and setters modify the Rust struct internally.

Additionally, CXX-Qt generates methods on this struct that help you interact with Qt functionality.
This includes access to the [`CxxQtThread` struct](./cxxqtthread.md), as well as a function to emit signals.

## Referencing another QObject

The `qobject::T` type is defined both within the CXX-Qt bridge, as well as the surrounding module.
The simplest way to reference it is from the surrounding module.

Example:
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
// In file qt_types.rs
#[cxx_qt::bridge]
mod ffi {
  #[cxx_qt::qobject]
  #[derive(Default)]
  pub struct MyObject {}
}
```

``` rust,ignore,noplayground
// In another module
fn my_function(parameter: &crate::qt_types::qobject::MyObject) { /* ... */ }
```

Unfortunately, nested QObjects aren't yet supported by CXX-Qt.
Progress can be tracked in [#299](https://github.com/KDAB/cxx-qt/issues/299).

## `impl qobject::T`
As mentioned before, the C++ QObject is exposed to Rust as an opaque CXX type.
This allows you to implement methods for it in Rust using normal `impl` blocks.
Because `qobject::T` is an opaque C++ type, the same rules as with normal CXX opaque types apply.
Most importantly this means that the type may never be accessed by value or by mutable self reference directly.
Rather, all methods must use either `&self` or `self: Pin<&mut Self>` as the self types. This prevents Rust from moving the data in memory, which would invalidate C++ pointers to it.

For more information about pinning, refer to the [pin documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/pin/).

In addition to methods that extend the Rust interface of a `qobject::T`, you may also mark methods within an `impl qobject::T` block with the `#[qinvokable]` attribute.
These methods will be exposed to the C++ QObject and can be called by C++ or QML.
See the [QObject page](./qobject_struct.md#invokables) for more details.

## Available Functions

Every `qobject::T` struct provides the following methods:

### Access to the Qt thread
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
fn qt_thread(&self) -> CxxQtThread<T>
```
This function provides you with a handle to the Qt thread that the QObject resides in.
This is helpful as the QObject itself does not implement [Send](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Send.html) nor [Sync](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/marker/trait.Sync.html).
The CxxQtThread however is Send and can therefore be moved into a different thread.
By using the CxxQtThread's `queue` method, you may then queue a Rust closure onto the Qt thread again.
The closure also takes a pinned mutable reference to the QObject, so that it can modify it.

See the [CxxQtThread page](./cxxqtthread.md) for more details.

### Access to internal Rust struct
For every field in the Rust struct, CXX-Qt will generate appropriate getters and setters.
See the [QObject page](./qobject_struct.md#properties) for details.

There is also an advanced way to access the data in the internal Rust struct:
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
fn rust(&self) -> &T
fn rust_mut(self: Pin<&mut Self>) -> &mut T
```
Where `T` is the struct with the `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` macro.

This allows you to directly manipulate the internal Rust struct without having to use the generated accessor methods.

You may modify the struct and then manually call the required changed signals.

For normal access, prefer using the generated accessor methods for [properties](./qobject_struct.md#properties).
