book/src/qobject/qobject_struct.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2021 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# QObject Marked Struct

The `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` marked struct allows you to define the following items

  * The name of the C++ class for the QObject
  * Invokable methods that are exposed to Qt
  * Private methods and fields for struct to use (eg this is useful for storing the channels for [threading](../concepts/threading.md))
  * Mutate C++ state with [`CppObj`](./cpp_object.md)
  * Use [CxxQtThread<T>](./cxxqtthread.md) for multi threaded workflows

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/src/rust_obj_invokables.rs:book_macro_code}}
```

## Invokables

A `impl cxx_qt::QObject<T>` is used to define invokables, the `impl cxx_qt::QObject<T>` defines that the methods are implemented onto the C++ QObject `T`.
Therefore they have access to both C++ and Rust methods. Also CXX-Qt adds wrapper code around your invokables to automatically perform any conversion between the [C++ and Rust types](../concepts/types.md).

To mark a method as invokable simply add the `#[qinvokable]` attribute to the Rust method. This then causes `Q_INVOKABLE` to be set on the C++ definition of the method, allowing QML to call the invokable.

Note to access properties on the C++ object use [Cpp Object](./cpp_object.md).

## Private Methods and Fields

Unlike the [Data Struct](./data_struct.md) fields which are defined on the `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` marked struct are not exposed as properties to Qt. These can be considered as "private to Rust" fields, and are useful for storing channels for threading or internal information for the QObject.

Methods implemented using `impl T` (and not `impl cxx_qt::QObject<T>`) are just normal Rust member methods.
Therefore they do not have access to any C++ or QObject functionality (e.g. emitting Signals, changing properties, etc.)
You will usually only need to use `impl T` if you want to also use your struct as a normal Rust struct, that is not wrapped in a QObject.

Commit message:

cxx-qt-gen: remove the Data struct and move properties to Rust (#235)
* cxx: use unpin-uniqueptr branch for now

* cxx-qt-gen: remove the Data struct and move properties

book/src/qobject/qobject_struct.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2021 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# QObject Marked Struct

The `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` marked struct allows you to define the following items

  * The name of the C++ class for the QObject
  * Invokable methods that are exposed to Qt
  * Private methods and fields for struct to use (eg this is useful for storing the channels for [threading](../concepts/threading.md))
  * Mutate C++ state with [`CppObj`](./cpp_object.md)
  * Use [CxxQtThread<T>](./cxxqtthread.md) for multi threaded workflows

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/src/rust_obj_invokables.rs:book_macro_code}}
```

## Invokables

A `impl cxx_qt::QObject<T>` is used to define invokables, the `impl cxx_qt::QObject<T>` defines that the methods are implemented onto the C++ QObject `T`.
Therefore they have access to both C++ and Rust methods. Also CXX-Qt adds wrapper code around your invokables to automatically perform any conversion between the [C++ and Rust types](../concepts/types.md).

To mark a method as invokable simply add the `#[qinvokable]` attribute to the Rust method. This then causes `Q_INVOKABLE` to be set on the C++ definition of the method, allowing QML to call the invokable.

Note to access properties on the C++ object use [Cpp Object](./cpp_object.md).

## Properties

Fields within the `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` marked struct can be tagged with the `#[qproperty]`, this declares which fields should be exposed as `Q_PROPERTY`s on the QObject.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/src/struct_properties.rs:book_macro_code}}
```

If you want to provide default values for your QObject, then instead of deriving implement the `Default` trait for the struct.

## Private Methods and Fields

Fields within the `#[cxx_qt::qobject]` marked struct that aren't tagged are not exposed as properties to Qt. These can be considered as "private to Rust" fields, and are useful for storing channels for threading or internal information for the QObject.

Methods implemented using `impl T` (and not `impl cxx_qt::QObject<T>`) are just normal Rust member methods.
Therefore they do not have access to any C++ or QObject functionality (e.g. emitting Signals, changing properties, etc.)
You will usually only need to use `impl T` if you want to also use your struct as a normal Rust struct, that is not wrapped in a QObject.
