book/src/qobject/signals_enum.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# Signals enum

The `cxx_qt::qsignals(T)` attribute is used on an enum to define which signals should exist on the QObject `T`. It allows you to define the signal name and the parameters of the signal.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs:book_signals_enum}}
```

## Emitting a signal

To emit a signal from Rust use the [`CppObj`](./cpp_object.md) and call either the `emit_queued(Signal)` method.

Note that signals are queued to avoid a deadlock if the `Q_EMIT` is `Qt::DirectConnection` connected to a Rust invokable on the same QObject that has caused the `Q_EMIT`, as this would then try to lock the internal Rust object which is already locked.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs:book_rust_obj_impl}}
```

Commit message:

Book: Update qobject::T, Signals & CXXQtThread sections

book/src/qobject/signals_enum.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# Signals enum

The `cxx_qt::signals(T)` attribute is used on an [enum](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch06-01-defining-an-enum.html) to define [signals](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/signalsandslots.html) for the QObject `T`.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs:book_signals_enum}}
```

For every enum variant CXX-Qt will generate a signal on the corresponding QObject.
If the enum variant has members, they will become the parameters for the corresponding signal.

Because CXX-Qt needs to know the names of each parameter, only enum variants with named members are supported.
The Signal parameters are generated in order of appearance in the enum variant.

## Emitting a signal

For every generated QObject [`qobject::T`](./cpp_object.md) that has a signals enum CXX-Qt will generate an `emit` function:
``` rust,ignore,noplayground
fn emit(self: Pin<&mut Self>, signal: /*Signals enum*/)
```
`emit` can therefore be called from any mutable `#[qinvokable]`.

The `emit` function will immediately emit the signal and call any connected slots.
To queue the call to `emit` until the next Event loop cycle, you can use the [`CxxQtThread`](./cxxqtthread.md).

### [Example](https://github.com/KDAB/cxx-qt/blob/main/examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs)
```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_features/rust/src/signals.rs:book_macro_code}}
```
