book/src/concepts/build_systems.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# Build Systems

CXX-Qt can be integrated into existing CMake projects or built with only cargo. The getting started guide provides documentation on how to set up your project:

- [Cargo Integration](../getting-started/4-cargo-executable.md)
- [CMake Integration](../getting-started/5-cmake-integration.md)

CXX-Qt could work with any C++ build system so long as the `QMAKE` and `CXXQT_EXPORT_DIR` environment variables are set before calling Cargo,
as documented in [CMake integration](../getting-started/5-cmake-integration.md). However, using C++ build systems besides CMake with CXX-Qt is untested.

## `CxxQtBuilder`

With both build systems a build script (`build.rs`) file needs to be used,
so that CXX-Qt knows which files to look for bridges and to build a Qt C++ library for linking later.

See [`CxxQtBuilder` documentation](https://docs.rs/cxx-qt-build/latest/cxx_qt_build/struct.CxxQtBuilder.html) for more details.

## QML Modules

When using QML with CXX-Qt [QML modules](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qtqml-writing-a-module.html) can be output.
This allows for attributes such as `#[qml_element]` to register the `QObject` with the QML type system without any C++ code.

See [`QmlModule` documentation](https://docs.rs/cxx-qt-build/latest/cxx_qt_build/struct.QmlModule.html) for more details.

Commit message:

Allow cxx-qt-build to deal with build scripts running in parallel (#999)
* refactor: Rename CXXQT_* variables to CXX_QT_*

This is more in line with our crate naming (cxx-qt, not cxxqt) and
is more consistent, as before we were using both.

Fix #996

* refactor: Rename cxxqt_ CMake functions to cxx_qt_

This is more consistent with all our other naming.

* fix: build: Use export_dir on final crate only

Cargo can sometimes build different configurations of the same crate in
parallel.
This caused some failures with our new build system.
However, we can solve this by reverting to the OUT_DIR again.
Using the OUT_DIR is the only supported way to write artifacts anyway.

However, we still need to export data for CMake.
Therefore, we define an additional flag for each exact crate that CMake
is trying to import.
Only this exact crate will then export its data.
As CMake should only build a single configuration at a time, this should
not conflict.

* book: Document user-facing changes to CMake build

* cmake: Resolve ${CRATE} and ${APP_NAME} variables

At least do so in `qml_minimal`. I got the feedback from Milian that
this is rather hard to read otherwise, which I agree with.
Especially as that's the code we include in our getting-started guide it
should be as simple as possible.

* book: Update internals documentation

This is now slightly different, as we're no longer using a shared export
directory

book/src/concepts/build_systems.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# Build Systems

CXX-Qt can be integrated into existing CMake projects or built with only cargo. The getting started guide provides documentation on how to set up your project:

- [Cargo Integration](../getting-started/4-cargo-executable.md)
- [CMake Integration](../getting-started/5-cmake-integration.md)

CXX-Qt could work with any C++ build system so long as the `QMAKE`, `CXX_QT_EXPORT_DIR` and `CXX_QT_EXPORT_CRATE_<CRATE-NAME>` environment variables are set before calling Cargo.
Take a look at our CMake code for how this can be used.
However, using C++ build systems besides Cargo or CMake with CXX-Qt is untested and the use of these environment variables is SemVer-exempt!

## `CxxQtBuilder`

With both build systems a build script (`build.rs`) file needs to be used,
so that CXX-Qt knows which files to look for bridges and to build a Qt C++ library for linking later.

See [`CxxQtBuilder` documentation](https://docs.rs/cxx-qt-build/latest/cxx_qt_build/struct.CxxQtBuilder.html) for more details.

## QML Modules

When using QML with CXX-Qt [QML modules](https://doc.qt.io/qt-6/qtqml-writing-a-module.html) can be output.
This allows for attributes such as `#[qml_element]` to register the `QObject` with the QML type system without any C++ code.

See [`QmlModule` documentation](https://docs.rs/cxx-qt-build/latest/cxx_qt_build/struct.QmlModule.html) for more details.
