book/src/concepts/qqmlextensionplugin.md, before:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# QQmlExtensionPlugin

Qt allows for plugins containing object definitions to be loaded at runtime from a directory instead of being embedded into the application.

This allows for a clean split between disciplines of business logic and GUI code.

CXX-Qt allows for generating a plugin and qmldir file so that you can load Rust objects as a plugin into your application.

When using QQmlExtensionPlugin the folder structure of your project may look like the following, you can see the clear split between "core" and "ui".

```ignore
src/
 - core/
   - build.rs
   - Cargo.toml
   - CMakeLists.txt
   - src/
     - lib.rs
 - ui/
   - main.qml
   - qml.qrc
 CMakeLists.txt
 main.cpp
```

## Rust build.rs changes

In your `build.rs` specify that you want to use a QQmlExtensionPlugin by invoking the method `qqmlextensionplugin` as seen in the following example.

Here you specify the import name for QML and the name you are using for the resultant plugin target.

```rust,ignore,noplayground
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_extension_plugin/core/build.rs:book_build_rs}}
```

## CMake changes

The following example shows the CMake definition for building an extension plugin.

Note that the folder structure must match the QML import name, eg `import foo.bar 1.0` means the folder structure of `foo/bar` is required that then contains the plugin and qmldir file.

```cmake,ignore
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_extension_plugin/core/CMakeLists.txt:book_cmake_generation}}
```

## Qt C++ changes

To load the plugin at runtime add the directory containing the plugin to the QML import path.

```cpp,ignore
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_extension_plugin/main.cpp:book_extension_plugin_register}}
```

Commit message:

qmlextensionplugin: remove helpers and require developer to write C++ (#152)
For now remove the generation of the plugin.cpp and qmldir for the
qml extension plugin. This helps us make the CMake simpler later
and allows the developer to be more flexible. It's also a very
small and typical block of C++ code.

Change-Id: Ia2935d154014d2bf36076ccfc76d5ffe9975912f

book/src/concepts/qqmlextensionplugin.md, after:

<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2022 Klarälvdalens Datakonsult AB, a KDAB Group company <info@kdab.com>
SPDX-FileContributor: Andrew Hayzen <andrew.hayzen@kdab.com>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT OR Apache-2.0
-->

# QQmlExtensionPlugin

Qt allows for plugins containing object definitions to be loaded at runtime from a directory instead of being embedded into the application.

This allows for a clean split between disciplines of business logic and GUI code.

CXX-Qt allows for generating a plugin and qmldir file so that you can load Rust objects as a plugin into your application.

When using QQmlExtensionPlugin the folder structure of your project may look like the following, you can see the clear split between "core" and "ui".

```ignore
src/
 - core/
   - build.rs
   - Cargo.toml
   - CMakeLists.txt
   - src/
     - lib.rs
   - plugin.cpp
   - qmldir
 - ui/
   - main.qml
   - qml.qrc
 CMakeLists.txt
 main.cpp
```

## CMake changes

The following example shows the CMake definition for building an extension plugin.

Note that the folder structure must match the QML import name, eg `import foo.bar 1.0` means the folder structure of `foo/bar` is required that then contains the plugin and qmldir file.

```cmake,ignore
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_extension_plugin/core/CMakeLists.txt:book_cmake_generation}}
```

## Qt C++ changes

Define a QQmlExtensionPlugin `plugin.cpp` as normal, here you specify the QML names for the Rust types.

```cpp,ignore
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_extension_plugin/core/plugin.cpp:book_qml_plugin}}
```

Then create a `qmldir` file which matches your C++ library name.

```txt,ignore
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_extension_plugin/core/qmldir}}
```

To load the plugin at runtime add the directory containing the plugin to the QML import path.

```cpp,ignore
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_extension_plugin/main.cpp:book_extension_plugin_register}}
```

Then use the plugin from the import uri and version specified in the plugin and qmldir.

```qml,ignore
{{#include ../../../examples/qml_extension_plugin/ui/main.qml:book_qml_import}}
```
